# Debian

I chose Debian as my server OS because it does not come with Snap like Ubuntu, and it is famously stable.

The goal is to install it headless with SSH access so I can access it from my MacBook.

## Boot media

I need a USB stick with Debian.

1. I downloaded the ISO from https://www.debian.org. At the time of writing, `debian-13.4.0-amd64-netinst` was available via a big "Download" button on the main page, so I used that.
2. I had to create a bootable USB drive. I have a Linux Mint desktop available, so I right-clicked the ISO and chose `Make bootable USB stick`.

## UEFI

Before I install anything, it is a good idea to tweak the UEFI a bit while I still have a monitor connected.

1. The PC came with Windows 11 Pro preinstalled. I used `System` > `Recovery` > `Advanced restart` to reboot into UEFI quickly. On Lenovo ThinkCentre systems, `F12` opens the boot menu, and `F1` enters UEFI.
2. In `Exit`, I set `OS Optimized Defaults` to `True` (modern Windows defaults), then clicked `Load Optimal Defaults` to reset any settings made by the previous owner.
3. In `Devices`, I opened `Network Setup` and set `PXE Option ROM` to `Disabled`. This disables booting from the network instead of the SSD or USB, which I do not need. I also set both `PXE IPV4/6 Network Stack` options to `Disabled`.
4. In `Advanced`, I opened `Intel (R) Manageability` and set `Intel (R) Manageability Control` to `Disabled`. It is remote admin firmware for fleet management, which I do not need for a simple home server.
5. In `Power`, I set `After Power Loss` to `Power On` to ensure the PC auto-starts after a power cut, which is good for servers. I also opened `Automatic Power On` and set `Wake on LAN` to `Automatic`.
6. In `Security`, I opened `Secure Boot` and made sure `Secure Boot` was set to `Disabled` (it was already disabled). I also opened `Computrace` and set `Current Setting` to `Disabled`.
7. In `Startup`, I opened `Primary Boot Sequence` and put the USB drive as the first boot device.
8. Finally, I went back to `Exit` and pressed `Save Changes and Exit`.

## Install

With sane UEFI settings, I can begin installing Debian.

1. After rebooting, I selected `Graphical install`.
2. In the graphical installer:
    1. I selected `English` as my language.
    2. I selected `United States` as my location (I prefer the American English locale).
    3. I selected the `American English` keyboard.
    4. I selected `debian` as my hostname.
    5. I left the domain name blank.
    6. I left the root password blank.
    7. I selected `void` as my full name and username, because `admin` was not allowed.
    8. I used my password manager to generate a strong user password.
    9. I selected the `Eastern` time zone.
    10. I selected `Guided - use entire disk` to wipe the original Windows install.
    11. I selected my 256 GB internal NVMe as the target.
    12. I selected `All files in one partition (recommended for new users)` for partitioning.
    13. I confirmed partitioning.
    14. I selected `Poland` and then `deb.debian.org` as the Debian archive mirror.
    15. I left the HTTP proxy blank.
    16. I selected `Yes` when asked to participate in the package usage survey because Debian is awesome.
    17. On the software selection screen, I only checked `SSH server` and `standard system utilities`.
3. After the OS was installed, I removed the USB stick and pressed `Continue` to reboot.

## First boot

Now that Debian is installed, I can log in via TTY.

1. After a restart, I was greeted with a TTY and logged in. The password generated by the password manager was very long and painful to type, but security is important.
2. I ran the usual `sudo apt update` and `sudo apt full-upgrade`, but the system was already up to date. I also ran `sudo -v` to confirm that `sudo` was set up correctly, which it was, as I left the root password blank during installation.
3. I ran `ip -4 addr` to find the local IP address I could SSH into. It was `192.168.1.79`, so I could use `ssh void@192.168.1.79`.

## SSH access

Now I can set up access from my MacBook so the server can actually be headless.

1. I SSHed into the server from my MacBook using:
    ```sh
    ssh void@192.168.1.79
    ```
2. When asked whether I wanted to continue connecting, I entered `yes`.
3. I entered my password, this time copying it from my password manager, so it was easy.
4. I used `ssh-keygen -t ed25519 -a 100 -C "macbook-to-debian"` to generate an SSH key. I used my password manager to generate a passphrase.
5. I ran `cat ~/.ssh/id_ed25519.pub` on my MacBook to view my public key.
6. I SSHed into my server via `ssh void@192.168.1.79` and ran the following on the Debian server, pasting my public key via `nano` (I should have just used `ssh-copy-id`, lol):
    ```sh
    mkdir -p ~/.ssh
    chmod 700 ~/.ssh
    nano ~/.ssh/authorized_keys
    chmod 600 ~/.ssh/authorized_keys
    ```
7. I ran `ssh -i ~/.ssh/id_ed25519 void@192.168.1.79` to test whether the key worked. I was asked for a passphrase, and then the SSH connection worked and I logged in.
8. On macOS, I ran `ssh-add --apple-use-keychain ~/.ssh/id_ed25519` to add the passphrase to the macOS Keychain so I do not have to enter it again.

## Going headless

I now have convenient SSH access, so I can continue working on my MacBook.

1. I rebooted and, during boot, pressed `F1` to enter UEFI.
2. In `Startup`, I opened `Primary Boot Sequence` and put the NVMe with Debian as the first device.
3. I went back to `Exit` and pressed `Save Changes and Exit`.
4. I unplugged everything, leaving only the power cable and Ethernet connected.

## Static IP

I need to set a DHCP reservation for the server.

1. I first retrieved the active network interface and its MAC address with `ip link`. It was `aa:bb:cc:dd:ee:ff` (not showing my real one for privacy).
2. Then I retrieved the current IP address with `ip addr show eno1`. It was `192.168.1.79`.
3. Finally, I retrieved the router IP address with `ip route`. It was `192.168.1.1`.
4. I logged into its web interface via Safari. It is a Nokia G-241W-A router. For some reason, pretty much all fields were locked, so I had to paste this into Safari's console:
    ```js
    for (const element of document.querySelectorAll('input, button, select, textarea')) {
        element.disabled = false;
    }
    ```
5. I opened `Network` -> `LAN` and added them under `Static DHCP Entry`. I used `192.168.1.67` as the reserved IP.
6. I ran `sudo reboot` on the Debian server.
7. I SSHed via `ssh void@192.168.1.67` to confirm that it worked.

## Final tweaks

There are a couple of small things worth changing.

1. During setup, I chose the United States as my region, so the time zone needed to be fixed. I ran `sudo timedatectl set-timezone Europe/Warsaw` to set it to Poland.
2. While I still had a monitor connected, I noticed there was a GRUB screen before the OS started. I ran `sudo nano /etc/default/grub` to open the GRUB config, changed `GRUB_TIMEOUT` from `5` to `0`, then ran `sudo update-grub`.
3. To set up automatic updates, I ran `sudo apt install unattended-upgrades` and then `sudo dpkg-reconfigure unattended-upgrades`.
4. To set up a firewall with an SSH whitelist, I ran:
    ```sh
    sudo apt install ufw
    sudo ufw default deny incoming
    sudo ufw default allow outgoing
    sudo ufw allow OpenSSH
    sudo ufw enable
    ```
5. To set up Avahi so I can access the server at `debian.local` (e.g., `ssh void@debian.local`), I ran:
    ```sh
    sudo apt install avahi-daemon
    sudo ufw allow 5353/udp
    ```
